>> Kyle Simpson: There are certainly
more advanced techniques.
And I wanna give you just a couple,
this is just a quick glimpse
at a couple of these.
And we're gonna come back to them later
in both lecture and exercise, okay?
So if I defined a couple of utilities,
and by the way, I'm not inventing these,
these are ones that you would find
in a functional programming library.
But let's define one called mod,
it's going to do modulus operation.
It's doing something which might
seem a little bit strange to you.
I'm taking the first input mod on line 1,
and taking y.
And then I'm returning a new
function called for x.
In other words, that function's
purpose is to receive the x input.
That's why I called it for x, okay?
And when that has been provided, when we
have provided a y first and then an x,
those are two separate function calls
where we provide two inputs one at a time.
Then what happens, is it does x mod y.
So, we're providing them
in a reverse order.
That's gonna feel a little strange to you,
but
I'll show you in just a moment
why we're gonna do that.
And then I'm going to do the same
thing with an eq operator.
An eq utility which takes a y and
it takes an x, and
then it returns us the equality
comparison of those two.
These two kinds of utilities, which take
their inputs individually, rather than
passing x, y at the same time, taking
them in two separate function calls.
We already saw a brief example of that,
and the question that was asked earlier,
is this sort of currying?
Yes, this is basically a manual form
of currying, we'll get to that.
But I'm saying I want the y
input first and then the x.
And I want to make a point
about that before we move on.
Remember that I said earlier,
functional programmers care a lot
about the shape of their functions.
It matters not just what kinds of
inputs a function receives, but
what order they're listed in.
Because if you list them
in a different order,
guess what people are gonna have to
do to use your function every time?
Flip it, or use reverse orgs or something.
You make it less
ergonomically friendly to use
when the inputs are listed
in an unnatural order.
So it matters what order.
And what you're going to
see here is actually,
there's an order that is much more
natural, which is yx instead of xy,
and yx instead of xy for
the equals function as well.
So that's why I've listed them
in that particular order.
Okay, so let's take a look at
how we can use this mod and
this eq function to define.
Remember we defined is
even in terms of as odd.
But what if we wanted to define
is odd in a point free way.
Remember, is odd was
defined as x mod 2 = 1.
If we had these two utilities in play,
couldn't we define is odd in
terms of those two functions?
So, I'm gonna take mod2, mod(2), that's
gonna return me back a function, right?
Where the y has been provided, but
the x still needs to be provided.
And I'm gonna call that function mod2,
because that function takes any input and
mods it with the number 2.
And then I'm gonna call eq(1) line 13.
And that makes an eq1 function,
whose job is to take any input value and
compare it to the value 1 is equal to 1.
>> Kyle Simpson: Quick little
foreshadowing to stuff we're gonna talk
about earlier.
Do you see that the mod2
function on line 12 is
more specific than the general
mod to function on line 1?
The general mod function
on line 1 takes two inputs,
the mod2 function on line
12 only takes one input.
Cuz it's got one of them
already prespecified.
That's a more specialized function,
we'll come back to the idea of
specialization later, okay?
But I've got a mod 2 an eq1, how can I
define is odd in terms of those functions?
Well, it's actually
pretty straightforward.
Take the mod2 and pass in the X, and
whatever that returns, pass it into eq1.
>> Kyle Simpson: You
follow how I did that?
Now, that's not point free yet,
but we've made a lot of
progress moving from
operators to functions, okay?
So we're halfway there.
If we want a point free definition
of is odd, this is halfway there.
We notice that we have this eq1 and this
mod2, they're useful to us and we can make
those with the mod and eq operators that
are provided by our favorite library.
But we can also notice something
interesting and this is yet
another future thing that we'll
talk about later in this course,
which is the output of the mod2 call
is passed directly to the eq1 call.
Everybody see that?
That concept of having one
function call's output
immediately become the input
to another function.
That is a special name in programming,
that's called composition.
Again, throwback to a math class, you
may have heard somewhere, like fs of g,
or f compose g.
That's all a mathematical idea,
and here we see it in programming.
Take one function's output, and
make the input to another function.
So how can I use the idea that
this is a composition pattern
to my advantage to make
a point free definition?
Well, if I had a compose utility,
here's my is odd,
if I had a compose utility,
whose job was to
do the routing of one functions
output into another functions input.
Now line 14, I just defined is odd
as the composition of the eq1 and
the mod2 function.
Line 14 is my point free definition for
is odd.
It's doing under the covers, mod2 is fn1,
which is called with whatever value
passing to it, that's line 10.
So mod2 here is this function.
And if we pass in a value into is odd,
it will come in to mod2.
Whatever that output is would
come into fn2, which is eq1, and
eq1 is going to return us a true false
just like we want is odd to return, okay?
How am I able to make that analysis?
This is more equational reasoning,
that the function composed here
is the same shape as is odd, isn't it?
Look at those two,
look at composed with an fn1 and
an fn2 and
look at is odd with an fn1 and an fn2.
Look at the input x, look at the input v,
look at the return value and
the return value.
Those two are interchangeable,
which is what lets me know that line
14 is my point free definition.
I simply call compose, and
I get back the equivalent function,
that's the equational reasoning.
And we have one last equational reasoning
trick up our sleeve, which is on
line 1 and line 2, I defined those
intermediary functions mod2, and eq1.
>> Kyle Simpson: But now I can see
that eq1 could be replaced with eq(1).
And mod2 could be replace with mod(2).
So my final point free
definition looks like line 16.
Those pieces are interchangeable
because they have the same shape.
That's equational reasoning, and
equational reasoning is the heart of
being able to do point freestyle.
It's actually the heart of a bunch
of functional programming,
but especially point freestyle.
Asking yourself if I have this function
and I need to make this function,
what kind of shape change needs to
occur so that they are interchangeable?
>> Kyle Simpson: I'm pretty sure that at
some point along the way we crossed that
line, for all of you were like,
I never would have come up with that.
At least that's how I was.
When I first saw this, I was like, woah,
we just went way beyond what I thought
was, like, I'm tracking with
the readability and now I'm lost.
And now I will just tell you that
having spent time practicing this, and
I'm fortunate enough that as a teacher,
I get to re-explain it and
re-show it, and re-code it over, and over,
and over, again, and that's my practice.
But in being able to practice this,
I will tell you that not
only can I read line 16 and
understand it, line 16 is more
readable to me than line 5.
I've gotten to the point where that
familiarity level has switched
to where the point free functional
style is actually more readable to me.
And whenever I see something like line 5,
immediately my brain says that's
a composition,
you should be using compose there.
I didn't get there overnight.
It didn't happen in a week,
it didn't happen in a month.
But over a period of time of practicing
these techniques, you become more familiar
with those patterns and they sort of jump
out at you just like you see the Legos in
the pile, and you say no,
I know exactly what Legos I need.
That's the heart of being
a functional programmer,
is getting used to that being
able to recognize that, and
then being able to read a lot stuff like
line 16 and have it make complete sense.